Old Testament
GENESIS (traditionally written by Moses)
Provides an account of the creation of the world and the origin of life. Answers the questions “How did God’s relationship with us begin?” and “How did the nation of Israel form?” Key personalities include Adam, Eve, Noah, Abraham, Sarah, Isaac, Rebekah, Jacob, and Joseph. View detailed outline.

EXODUS (traditionally written by Moses)
An account of how God delivered Israel from slavery in Egypt and provides a history of their departure. View detailed outline.

LEVITICUS (traditionally written by Moses)
Describes ceremonial law, the procedural instructions for how Israel (especially Levitical priests) should worship God. View detailed outline.

NUMBERS (traditionally written by Moses)
Describes a census of the people and Israel’s failure to trust and obey God (and thus are forced to wander in the wilderness for 40 years). View detailed outline.

Advertisements

DEUTERONOMY (traditionally written by Moses)
Moses gives Israel a rehash of the instructions for following God. Its intent is to remind Israelites of what God has given them and what he expects from them. View detailed outline.

JOSHUA (author unknown)
A description of Joshua’s campaign to conquer the Promised Land and distribute its properties to the Twelve Tribes of Israel. View detailed outline.

JUDGES (author unknown)
The history of Israel from Joshua to Samson. Judges describes a nation the repeats a cycle of turning away from God, falling captive and becoming an oppressed nation, calling out to God for help, and finally being rescued by their leaders (the “judges”). Key personalities include Othniel, Ehud, Deborah, Gideon, Abimelech, Jephthah, Samson, and Delilah. View detailed outline.

RUTH (author unknown)
Two widows lose everything but find hope which leads to the birth of Israel’s future king, King David.  Illustrates the outcome and difference between a nation that does not follow the covenant of God (Judges) and a nation that faithfully adheres to the covenant (Ruth). View detailed outline.

1 SAMUEL (author unknown)
Written by the last of the Judges, it provides a history of Israel during the judgeship of Samuel and the reign of Saul in order to demonstrate how Israel chose a king while neglecting God’s wishes.

2 SAMUEL (author unknown)
A narration of King David that demonstrates effective leadership while submitting to God. View detailed outline.

1 KINGS (author unknown)
The story of prosperity under King Solomon (the last king) followed by a split of his kingdom (into the Northern and Southern Kingdoms) after his death. View detailed outline.

2 KINGS (author unknown)
Two kings choose to turn from God and ultimately fall captive to other empires. View detailed outline.

1 CHRONICLES (traditionally written by Ezra)
Provides histories of the kingdoms of Judah and Israel followed by the history of David and the temple of God in Jerusalem. View detailed outline.

2 CHRONICLES (traditionally written by Ezra)
Solomon builds the temple but after rejecting God, Babylonians take Israel captive and destroy the temple.  Key personalities are King Solomon, the queen of Sheba, Rehoboam, Asa, Jehoshaphat, Jehoram, Joash, Uzziah, Ahaz, Hezekiah, Manasseh, and Josiah. View detailed outline.

EZRA (traditionally written by Ezra)
A book of narrative history and genealogies that present an accurate record of the return of the Jews from the Babylonian captivity and of the rebuilding of the temple. View detailed outline.

NEHEMIAH (written by Nehemiah)
Provides a historical record regarding the rebuilding of the temple and how Nehemiah rebuilt a wall around the city to protect from further attacks. View detailed outline.

ESTHER (author unknown)
An anonymous narrative history (some believe the author was Mordecai) presenting the story of Jews who stayed behind after others returned to Jerusalem after captivity. Esther becomes queen of the land and saves her people. View detailed outline.

JOB (author unknown)
Possibly the oldest book in the Bible, it tells the story of a man attacked directly by Satan while his friends argue about the reason behind the horrible events surrounding him. View detailed outline.

PSALMS (various authors)
A collection of 150 songs of joy, laments, blessings, and thanksgivings that Israel sang to God in praise. View detailed outline.

PROVERBS (Solomon and various other authors)
A collection of the wise sayings of Solomon that teach wisdom to God’s people. Proverbs are short, clever verses (easy to remember) that deal with life, good judgement, and Godly principles. View detailed outline.

ECCLESIASTES (traditionally written by Solomon)
A philosophical collection of proverbs, maxims, and sayings that explore the meaning of life and proffer wisdom to others seeking truth in God. View detailed outline.

SOLOMON’S SONG (traditionally written by Solomon)
A collection of love songs (poems)  about love, desire, and marriage. The purpose of Song of Songs is a picture of God’s love for his people. View detailed outline.

ISAIAH (written by Isaiah)
Written by Isaiah, one of the major prophets.  Provides a history of how the prophet Isaiah warned Israel of future judgement and a coming king who will bear their sins. Contains some of the most incredible prophecies of any book in the Bible. View detailed outline.

JEREMIAH (written by Jeremiah)
Prophecies announcing the coming Babylonian captivity, the suffering of the people, and the ultimate overthrow of their enemies. Key personalities are the many kings Judah, Baruch, Ebdemelech, King Nebuchadnezzar, and the Rechabites. View detailed outline.

Advertisements

LAMENTATIONS (traditionally written by Jeremiah)
Written by Jeremiah (the “weeping prophet”), presents dirges that describe the sorrow felt upon the fall of Jerusalem and the destruction of the temple after Babylonian attacks. View detailed outline.

EZEKIEL (written by Ezekiel)
God guides Ezekiel to speak to Israel providing prophetic warning messages over the judgement upon Judah if they do not repent. View detailed outline.

DANIEL (written by Daniel)
Daniel records a historical narrative detailing events during the Babylonian captivity and a series of prophetic visions concerning Christ and Israel’s future. View detailed outline.

HOSEA (written by Hosea)
The story of Hosea (one of the Minor Prophets) marrying a prostitute who abandons him and his fight to bring her back.  Provides a story of Israel’s tumultuous relationship with God. View detailed outline.

JOEL (written by Joel)
Joel describes a plague of locusts and other woes upon his people and warns that this is only the beginning of what is to come if the Southern Kingdom does not repent. View detailed outline.

AMOS (written by Amos)
A shepherd named Amos predicts neighboring nations will be punished by conquerors from the north, and of the fulfillment of the Messiah’s kingdom. View detailed outline.

OBADIAH (written by Obadiah)
The prophet Obadiah warns Edom they will soon be judged for their attacks against God’s people. View detailed outline.

JONAH (traditionally written by Jonah)
Jonah, a disobedient prophet, leaves God and is swallowed by a whale. He then returns and delivers God’s message to the people of Nineveh. View detailed outline.

MICAH (written by Micah)
Micah opposes Israelite leaders, predicting the invasions of Shalmaneser and Sennacherib, Babylonian captivity, establishment of a kingdom in Jerusalem, and the birth of the Messiah in Bethlehem. View detailed outline.

NAHUM (written by Nahum)
Nahum prophecies God’s judgement on Nineveh and the fall of Assyria. View detailed outline.

HABAKKUK (written by Habakkuk)
Habakkuk asks God to stop violence in Judah and is surprised when God uses the violent Babylonians to accommodate his request. View detailed outline.

ZEPHANIAH (written by Zephaniah)
Offers a prophecy regarding the overthrow of Judah and the surrounding nations for their idolatry and wickedness – but notes that they will be restored with peace and justice. View detailed outline.

HAGGAI (written by Haggai)
Haggai challenges the Israelites for abandoning the  rebuilding of the God’s temple. View detailed outline.

ZECHARIAH (written by Zechariah)
As Zechariah pleads with Israel to return to God, he records prophetic visions regarding the rebuilding of the temple and the Messiah. View detailed outline.

MALACHI (written by Malachi)
God sends Malachi to deliver prophecy about the calling of Gentiles and the coming of Christ. View detailed outline.

New Testament
GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW (Matthew – written by Matthew)
An account of Jesus’ life, death, and resurrection. View detailed outline.

GOSPEL OF ST. MARK (Mark – written by John Mark)
An account of Jesus’ life, death, and resurrection. View detailed outline.

GOSPEL OF ST. LUKE (Luke – written by Luke)
Luke provides a more thorough  account of Jesus’ life, death, and resurrection. View detailed outline.

GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN (John – written by John)
John offers stories of signs and miracles associated with Jesus. View detailed outline.

ACTS OF THE APOSTLES (Acts – written by Luke)
The history and actions of the founders of the the Christian Church. View detailed outline.

Advertisements

EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS (Romans – written by Paul)
A letter to the churches in Rome explaining how Christianity should work. View detailed outline.

FIRST EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS (1 Corinthians – written by Paul)
A letter from St. Paul to the church in Corinth, condemning their errors and answering questions about how Christians should live. View detailed outline.

SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS (2 Corinthians – written by Paul)
A letter of reconciliation from Paul to the church in Corinth clearing up additional concerns. View detailed outline.

EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS (Galatians – written by Paul)
A letter written by Paul to the Galatian churches correcting their belief that salvation comes from following lows of Moses rather than faith in Jesus. View detailed outline.

EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS (Ephesians – written by Paul)
A letter written by Paul to the church at Ephesus. View detailed outline.

EPISTLE TO THE PHILIPPIANS (Philippians – written by Paul)
A letter written by Paul to the church of Philippi explaining how to live in Christ’s ways. View detailed outline.

EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS (Colossians – written by Paul)
A letter written by Paul to the church at Colossae about how to walk in Christ’s footsteps. View detailed outline.

FIRST EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS (1 Thessalonians – written by Paul)
A letter written by Paul to the church at Thessalonica praising their ministry and encouraging them to do more. View detailed outline.

SECOND EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS (2 Thessalonians – written by Paul)
A letter written by Paul to the church at Thessalonica with instructions on how to maintain their faith. View detailed outline.

FIRST EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY (1 Timothy – written by Paul)
St. Paul instructs Timothy on how to properly lead a church with sound teaching and Christian example. View detailed outline.

SECOND EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY (2 Timothy – written by Paul)
Near the end of his life, Paul gives additional encouragement to Timothy. View detailed outline.

EPISTLE TO TITUS (Titus – written by Paul)
Paul advices Titus on how to lead churches on the island of Crete. View detailed outline.

EPISTLE TO PHILEMON (Philemon – written by Philemon)
A recommendation to Philemon that he accept his runaway slave as a brother. View detailed outline.

EPISTLE TO HEBREWS (Hebrews – Author unknown)
A letter offering encouragements to Christians despite their life of persecution. View detailed outline.

EPISTLE OF JAMES (James – written by James (possibly the brother of Jesus))
A letter explaining how Christians can present their lives in order to demonstrate their faith. View detailed outline.

FIRST EPISTLE OF PETER (1 Peter – written by Peter)
An encouraging letter from Paul to Christians who are being persecuted. View detailed outline.

SECOND EPISTLE OF PETER (2 Peter – written by Peter)
A letter from Peter to Christians, warning them about false teachers to come. View detailed outline.

FIRST EPISTLE OF ST. JOHN (1 John – written by John)
A letter from John to Christians about faith, love, and leading by example. View detailed outline.

SECOND EPISTLE OF ST. JOHN (2 John – written by John)
Brief letter from John about love and obedience to God. View detailed outline.

THIRD EPISTLE OF ST. JOHN (3 John – written by John)
Short letter from John about Christian fellowship. View detailed outline.

Advertisements
EPISTLE OF ST. JUDE (Jude – written by Jude)
A letter to Christians about keeping faith while non-believers invade the church unnoticed. View detailed outline.

THE REVELATION (Revelation – written by John)
John’s vision of things that have been, things that are, and things that are to come. View detailed outline.